Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Mael Lemoine. He's a
professor of philosophy at the University of Bordeaux, and
he, today we're going to talk about his book,
Philosophy of Physiology. So Doctor Lemoan, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, shared pleasure for me. Thank you for having
me here.
So, uh, the book is centered on philosophy of
physiology, but of course if I understood it correctly,
there's a lot of overlap with questions that people
explore in the philosophy of medicine, and we can
talk more about that and clarify that issue. How
do people tend to approach the question what is
health and disease in the philosophy of medicine?
I think they tend to approach it as a
practice and uh so they see medicine as a
practice, which it is, of course, and uh they
are mostly interested in, for instance, questions like values
uh that would um uh. Be active in that
practice or you know, play a role in the
decisions that are taken and that kind of, uh,
so that's the kind of approach they generally have.
And uh I would say in philosophical terms, they
also many of them have, I think implicitly and
they're not aware of it, they have what I
call a foundationalist view of uh of general questions
like what health is or what disease is. And
by that I mean that they tend to, to
admit the idea that these concepts are fixed once
and for all and would determine, uh medical practice
in general, uh, in contrast with a view where
these concepts are in fact scientific and as as
such, they are open to many modifications depending on
what we discover and how we come to conceptualize
health and disease.
In the book, er, right at the very beginning,
you talk about the divide between the naturalists and
the normativists in the philosophy of medicine. Could you
explain that divide?
Yes, it's so it's really a very traditional, very
important divide in philosophy of medicine. The majority of
philosophers of medicine are more normativists, meaning that they
consider concepts like health and disease to be value-laden
concepts, so they would insist on that idea, and
I think that naturalists on the other side generally,
in general, would agree with the fact that there
are values. Involved in those terms, obviously I mean
health is something that is good to have. Disease
is something that is bad to have, but their
point is that it's not the defining feature of
those terms. They consider that it's connotations of the
term or secondary properties of health and disease. It's
good to have or bad to have, for instance,
harmful or not and all that, whereas normativists would
consider that this is the primary defining traits of
those concepts. So that's approximately how the divide can
be defined.
So right in my first question, I asked you
about what is health and what is disease and
how it is approached in the philosophy of medicine,
but is the philosophy of medicine the same thing
as the philosophy of the sciences of health and
disease? And if not, why not?
Yes, it's a, yeah, that's a difficult question. I
think that. Traditionally people consider that philosophy of medicine
is a part of philosophy of science, and it's
the part of philosophy of science that studies or
investigates uh the sciences of health and disease, roughly
medical sciences, let's say. But the kind of approach,
the kind of methods that most philosophers, many, let's
say philosophers of medicine are taking tend to not
go very deep into scientific questions, just so it
makes a very striking contrast between philosophers of medicine
on the one hand and say for instance. CLOSEST,
um, colleagues, philosophers of biology. So philosophers of biology
would have two traditions. They can see biology as
a practice, but many of them also see or
look into the theoretical foundations, for instance, of biology.
But let's say, for instance, typically people that are
studying uh the basis, uh, the basic concepts of,
uh, of, um, evolutionary biology. Uh, YOU cannot, I
mean, there's not a lot of people in philosophy
of medicine that are doing that. So that, this
is why, I mean, probably other philosophers of science
would say yes, it's a part of philosophy of
science, but not exactly or it's underdeveloped in that,
in that regard or only in one direction, let's
say. Yeah.
So to get into the central topic of the
book, what is physiology and what distinguishes it from
pathophysiology?
Yes, I mean, to, in continuity with your previous
question, the, the, the goal of, of calling the
book philosophy of Physiology rather than, uh, something like
basic concepts in philosophy of medicine or something is
precisely to emphasize that scientific part of medicine. So
of course it doesn't say anything against the kind
of work that people would do on medicine as
a practice, but it's also to help or suggest
that we can also develop this part that is
more focused on the scientific part of of biomedical
sciences. And the main science, the core science there,
if you look uh into this is or can
be called physiology. Physiology is much broader, of course,
than medical science. There is, of course, physiological research
on, for instance, how, uh, well, maybe we should
start with a general definition, very simple one, physiology
is the, the science of how organisms work. So
work is of course a very vague term, but
it means it's exactly that. I mean, it's philosophers
would say it's the study of the mechanisms of,
uh, that you can find in organisms and uh
so philosophy of physiology means that you're studying how
organisms work when it's human organisms and with a
focus on health and disease, it would be more
in the direction of philosophy of medicine. But if
you're interested in other questions that are maybe less
related to health and disease or not related to
human health and disease, for instance, it would probably
not be considered philosophy of medicine. So it's in
continuity with a part of philosophy of biology. That's
the first part of my answer and the second
one is there is a broad sense of physiology
that includes the study of health and disease. And
there is a more restricted sense where physiology is
only the study of organisms in, let's say normal
conditions, which is of course a very vague term,
while pathop physiology is the specific study of organisms
in abnormal conditions when they have a disease typically.
So what is then the philosophy of physiology? What
distinguishes it exactly from the philosophy of medicine? And
of course we're going to explore more of that,
but what are the central questions it deals with?
Yes, I would say, I mean, the, the proposal
I'm making is to say, it starts, this is,
I think more or less the way I wrote
it in the book, but it starts uh with
um abandoning this assumption of uh foundationalism. If you
start considering that health and disease should be very
clearly defined and in a restrictive way for for
the sciences, meaning that OK, we have a concept
of disease and everything that doesn't fit in that
concept shouldn't be considered a disease and therefore doctors
should not study it as a disease. That's the
way foundationalism works. If you abandon that view. Then
you, and you ask again the question, so what
is disease? Then the obvious question is, disease is
what biologists, medical doctors, medical researchers are theorizing, conceptualizing
as a disease. So you would look into the
sciences themselves. And try to see inductively, so to
speak, try to see how they conceptualize health, how
they conceptualize disease, rather than consider that they have
once and for all a kind of common sense
concept of health and disease that predetermines the way
they, they conceive it. Uh, SO that's, I would
say it starts with that. So philosophy of physiology
starts with that question. How do they theorize health?
How do they theorize disease?
And is there a theory of disease and the
science of health in physiology, not philosophy of physiology,
but physiology?
Yes, in physiology, so probably more than one at
the moment, and that's, that's likely to be the
reason why many philosophers of medicine would be happy
to consider that there is no theory of health
or theory of disease in physiology, as you say,
as opposed. In philosophy of physiology or philosophy of
medicine where everyone would say yes, there are theories,
for instance, Boor's theories of health or you know,
we, we, we use that kind of phrase, but
as you say, they, uh, if you look into
physiology itself, uh, you will not find one theory.
You would not, you would find probably a dominant
one, which is probably less than a theory, which
is the concept of homeostasis. Probably we'll talk more
about that, but that's a really a cornerstone for
physiology. Historically speaking, it has been, and it's still
something very powerful. If you ask any professor in
physiology what is the basic phenomenon of. Physiology they
would tell you, well, obviously it's homeostasis, but homeostasis
is also a vague term. It's difficult to say
exactly what it is, to define it very precisely,
and generally it's not something that is very useful
for physiologists. They don't need a general definition of
homeostasis. What they need more is to explain how
homeostasis works in specific cases. Uh, SO this is,
yeah, roughly I would say, uh, there is, so
to summarize my answer, there is not one unitary
theory, uh, not the equivalent, say, of, uh, of,
uh, the modern synthesis in evolutionary biology where you
can start from, even if it's not final, even
if you can add many things or discuss many,
that, there's not like one obvious venue for physiology.
Uh, BUT there are many, as I was saying,
uh, you would find, uh, many theories. So for
instance, you can find, let's, let's take a very
obvious example, a simple one. You can find something
like a genetic theory of diseases. So, and this
genetic theory of diseases is a kind of conceptualization
of disease in general, uh, and it's a, it's
a kind of open question to what extent can
we explain the pathological phenomenon. Meaning by that all
the diseases we know, uh, how much of that
can we explain from a genetic point of view,
and that's the goal of a genetic theory of
disease to take just that example.
OK. And is there any list of criteria that
cover all diseases? Is there anything that all of
them have in common?
Again, difficult question. If you ask that question that
way, it's likely that you fall back into the
way philosophy of medicine has traditionally dealt with that
question like is it anything common? So obviously you
would say yes, it's uh. Probably harmful and then
if you say, OK, what, what does harmful means
then we would say, yeah, this is judged harmful
by uh the, the, the, the sufferer of a
disease or a pathological condition. So we would have
that kind of very general level um properties, but
that's, but if you look into science, it's generally
not the way it works. Except in very specialized
areas of science where you can have a universal
definition with necessary and sufficient conditions. In physics sometimes
you can have that, uh, but it's generally associated
with sciences where you can strongly stipulate deficiency. You
can say for instance, you know, matter can be
defined. Like that energy is this, you know, entropy,
I would call entropy that. So you can have
this kind of very powerful mathematical and so on,
but this is very rare in biology, apart from
evolutionary biology where you can have that kind of
approach to some extent. In many other areas of
biology you cannot work that way because there are
so many exceptions, so many difficulties, so many complexities,
and so it's very difficult to have that kind
of approach and it's not the way it works.
Generally it works as a hypothesis. Exactly as I
said, for instance, when you have the genetic, if
you take again the example of the genetic theory
of disease or if you prefer the infectious theory
of diseases, uh, people would start with the assumption,
what if all diseases we know were explained by
an infection? And so it looks like a hypothesis
and then you start saying, OK, there are many
for which we're sure that that's the main explanation,
and there are some for which we have strong
suspicions that it might be explained. And maybe there
are some for which we have never explored that
hypothesis, and it might lead us to new discoveries.
So that's more the way it works. So typically
with the infectious theory of disease, as you, as
you know, as many people know or are aware
of, there is an infectious hypothesis about the origin
of, for instance, schizophrenia, schizophrenia. I'm not saying that
it's a strong theory, a strong hypothesis, but what
I'm saying is that this is exploratory and that's
the way theories work in physiology. They are hypothetical
like in other fields of science. So that's the,
it's more, it's not like it's something we can
know once and for all should be the case
in every disease. It's more like we are hyper
hyper uh supposing, uh, in fact that um. Perhaps
all diseases can be explained by this factor, knowing
that it's unlikely but not knowing to what extent
it's uh it's true.
Mhm. Is there a distinction between disease entities and
pathophysiological processes, because there are some people who tend
to establish an identity relationship between the two, right?
So, is there a distinction and what is their
relationship?
Yeah, so, uh, in fact, it's these two concepts,
uh, it's a good question because these two concepts
overlap to some extent. I mean, it's like you
can use, you can say, um, you can say,
for instance, let's take type 1 diabetes. Type one
diabetes is a neurological entity or disease entity, so
it means that it's a kind of label you
would use in research and in particularly for diagnosis.
So you would say this person suffers from type
one diabetes. So that's the way, the way that
concept works. But when you say type one diabetes,
sometimes you refer to a process, so something that
is happening. In the body of, uh, of, uh,
on the organism of those people, so in this
case that would be a kind of autoimmune process
when the, the, the immune system of, uh, of,
uh, the person with the disease would destroy uh
some cells in their pancreas, for instance. So, and
it's much more complex than that, but that's just
a small part of it. And uh, so your
question is, what is the difference between the two?
So first of all, it's a difference of point
of view. So one point of view is simply
the one you have when you diagnose. When you're
diagnose, you don't need to know. You don't always
need to know all the details about the, the,
uh, the physiological or the pathophysiological process. When you're
a researcher, on the other hand, you may not
need to know, for instance, all the symptoms that
a doctor would use to diagnose a disease or
you, Angelli, you know the, the disease entity, but
you don't think that they are very important. What
is important for you is the process at play.
And then the second aspect and the second aspect
of the um of your uh question I think
which is also important is that there are many
pathophysiological processes that are shared among various disease entities.
It's not like it's a 1 to 1 correspondence.
For instance, typically inflammation. IS a very general process
that is involved in many diseases. It's not only
involving diseases, it's also involving non pathological conditions or
states or processes, but it's a part of many
diseases. So it's one physiological process and many disease
entities.
Does anything unify the pathophysiology of all disease entities?
I think that's probably for me the way I
see it, it's the main question of philosophy of
physiology. It's at least not the one that philosophers
of physiology may hope to solve one day, but
that's one that can be very useful and powerful
to organize that field. So the way I would,
I would approach that question, for instance, would be
to go evolutionary. Meaning that if you investigate the
question in the light of evolution. You can ask
the questions, the question, what are the evolutionary conditions
for diseases to appear and to remain and not
to be eliminated by natural selection. So that's for
me, that's one unifying question. What are the roots
of diseases? What do, what explains the fact that
diseases are here, are, are very much shared across
species for for many of them with variations from
one species to another. So that, those are for
me the main unifying questions.
What kinds of disease theories are there and how
generalizable are disease theories?
Yes, we, we mentioned two, I mentioned the genetic
theory of diseases and the infectious theory of diseases.
In the book I listed, uh, I think 9
of them, just, but it's not, the idea is
not to give, you know, a final list of
these theories. It's just for the reader to be
aware of the fact that they are not, let's
say, hundreds of theories, but not just like 2
or 3 of them either. So it's more like
in the. Range of, uh, I don't know, about
10 theories uh ongoing and I give examples in
the book of uh very short ones obviously of
some of them. So for instance, there is another
one that, that you, you can call the guroscience
theory of diseases or gerontological if you prefer. Um,
THE idea is that um uh many diseases, maybe
not all of them, but many of them can
be considered to be, uh, let's say. Um, EXPLAINED
by aging. So you, you need a good definition,
a good approach, good concept of aging, and you
can explain many diseases as effects of aging. So
this sounds counterintuitive in the first place, uh, because
you, you would say, for instance, what about, I
don't know, early onset cancer, for instance, is not,
uh, but the thing is that it depends of
course on what you call aging, and aging is
not a process that happens only in what we
call the aged, uh, so let's say I don't
know, 45+ people or something. Uh, BUT it can
be understood as, for instance, a process that can
be accelerated, uh, and start, starts only as, uh,
uh, starts as early as when you're born or
even of course before, and you can have a,
uh, for instance, accelerated, uh, process of, let's say
degradation of some functions and, uh, so that explains
how that, uh, theory can explain, let's say, or
that shows how this theory could explain. Many diseases
and there are many more, but of course we
won't go through all of them.
Uh, IN the book you also talk about the
concept of pathological phenomenon. So what is the pathological
phenomenon?
Yes, I use that phrase, uh, because I think
it's useful to, for, especially I was, I had
it in mind, um, I mean, I, what I
had in, what I have in mind when I'm
using that phrase is the way philosophers of medicine
are approaching the, the question. And when you say,
when you use that phrase, the pathological phenomenon, I
think it helps see that we are talking about
uh a uh natural fact, something that you can
observe. Something that is of course value laden, of
course, uh determined by our preconceptions, common sense conceptions
and the, and the way we see the world
and what we want to do with it and
all that, but also if you use that term.
It's very obvious, and I'm not the only one
of course to propose that, so you have papers
by Paul Griffith, for instance, typically that would propose
that kind of approach. Uh, IT'S obvious that you
have diseases in plants. It's obvious that you have
diseases in insects, you have diseases in humans, of
course, and uh, and many, I mean all living
beings have diseases or are susceptible to, to, to,
to. So this, this is the phrase I'm using
to show that it's a fundamental property of organisms.
It's a very powerful force in evolution and it's
something that for that reason, for those reasons, would
benefit from being theorized from the point of view
of the natural science and not only as a
as a concept of medical practice.
And can we have a theory of the pathological
phenomenon? Is that possible?
Yeah, I mean that's also a big question. As
I said, I think the main task for philosophers
of physiology is to work in that direction, to
ask that question, can we, and I don't know.
For me, I don't know what I think is
important to consider is that even if we don't.
The very fact of asking questions like that is
useful. We took one example with the infectious theory
theory of disease. I don't believe, for instance, that
it's very likely that all diseases are explained by
infectious agents or by the process of infection. It
doesn't seem very plausible, does it? I mean, I
mean, I think anyone would agree, or many at
least would agree with me. That said, If someone
says, huh, and what if this disease was explained
by a bacterial infection, of course we would make,
you know, it would be a huge leap in
the research if it's true, if it's confirmed, of
course if it's not, it's maybe a loss of
time and and research resources, but it's really important
that researchers ask that question. And now comes the
second, which is more conceptual question. Suppose for one
second. That let's say 90% of diseases are shown
to be infectious. In that case, the point for
a philosopher of physiology would be to say, well,
the concept of disease itself is an infectious concept,
and then you cannot say, you could still say,
OK, for instance, as a, a normalivist philosopher of
medicine would have it, they would say something like,
OK, this is a harmful condition and all that.
Good, that's true, uh, that's for sure, but. If
you had 90% of diseases that are in fact
proved to be uh that proved to be infectious,
then you would have to define disease as an
infectious process. And uh and that's something very important
because it means that it's much more precise. The
concept is much more, you know, narrowly defined and
uh and that would be a great, you know,
great progress in physiological science. Unlikely again, very unlikely,
but what we shouldn't consider is that disease entities
are fixed, defined in isolation from one another and
once and for all. This is not the way
it works. It's the field is constantly um uh
under the influence of people that are trying to
generalize, and when they do that, what they do
in philosophical terms is theories. They propose theories of
diseases. So that's the kind of things that I,
I think or I suggest in the book that
we should investigate.
At a certain point in your book, you explore
a very interesting question. What do we gain by
asking why is the susceptibility to disease a universal
and necessary characteristic of living beings instead of what
do all diseases have in common?
Yes, I mean, related, as I said, I mean,
it's not. That would be my proposal. I mean,
the way I see it, I think I'm sure
there are many other ways of uh unifying the
field and, and investigating the theories. I think it's
one for me that's the one that I find
the most convincing, but, uh, I, I don't have
any argument to say that it's the only one
or whatever. That's not my point. Uh, SO I
proposed it just as an illustration of, uh, uh,
um, replacing this traditional question of philosophy of medicine
which again I. Its into a very, very narrow,
uh, and even I think a dead end, um,
a very narrow venue for, for, for researchers in
philosophy because they would be stuck into this question,
is it, uh, you know, is it values, which
values, you know, is it a natural fact, the
kind of traditional, uh, debates in philosophy of medicine,
uh, whereas if you ask this different question. Then
you can see that this question, what is disease
roughly can be asked in many different ways and
and some of them can be very very exciting
to explore. So that's the main reason why I
would, you know, propose that kind of reformulation of
the basic question for philosophy of physiology.
That's very interesting. Uh, WHAT is the idea of
disease profiles?
Yeah, so I propose also that term. I mean,
it doesn't play a big role in the, in
the book, but I again, I think it's a
nice illustration, um. Again, if you have, if I
had in mind the kind of approach that normativist
philosopher of medicine would have just to show them
that there are also other aspects that are interesting
in diseases, so the disease profile as I define
it can, can be, I mean, can relate to
many different features, but just to give you one
example. Some diseases have a a very typical epidemiological
profile. So if we get back just to take
again the example of age-related diseases. They have a
very, and you look at them at the level
of populations, they have a very typical pattern. They
would, meaning that their incidence, so the incidence is
the number of new cases of a disease in
a population in a given amount of time, their
incidence would increase exponentially with time. Up to a
certain point and that's considered to be a very
important defining feature for aging related diseases. Oh, it's
a bit more complex than that, but roughly this
is sufficient for to to see the kind of
idea they are behind this idea of a disease
profile. So if you look into some diseases that
work like that, or typically when people think of
of contagious diseases, as you know, they have a.
Again, very specific epidemiological pattern that would, you know,
increase exponentially and then peak and then uh and
then it would decrease very rapidly. So that's typical
of of an epidemic. So that's the kind of
things I had in mind like, you know, broad
patterns that you can use to study some specific
features of uh of the various diseases we have.
So it would be like a pattern of diseases
with uh I mean some of the parameters that
people take into account in public health and epidemi
in the epidemiology like prevalence incidence, average age of
onset, volatility and things like that.
Typically, and I think we can also broaden the
concept beyond, so that's the example I gave, but
I think it's also, it can also be very
interesting to look into diseases in the guise of
whether they are chronic or not, whether you know
what is the pattern at the individual level. Do
they take a long time to develop or are
they acute disease? So this is also the kind
of feature you can have in mind when you're
looking for disease profiles. They are typically diseases that
would be chronic. Some of them would resolve, others
not, uh, you know, or, or frequently resolve, and
others rarely resolve by themselves. So these are also
features of what we can call disease profiles, and
they are not really epidemiological.
Mhm. So we've been focusing a lot on disease.
How about the theory of physiological health? Can we
also have that and what would be physiological health?
Yes, that's, uh, so that's the, the last chapter
of the, of, uh, of the book. Um, I
tried to develop a little bit some ideas in
that, uh, in that, uh, direction, uh, but it's
just one chapter, uh, because I think, I mean,
there, there is a recent trend in, uh, let's
say physiological sciences in general, let's say, meaning, I
mean, uh, study of, uh, of, uh, the, of,
for instance, the, um. Nervous systems, the study of
the immune system, the study of digestions, reproduction, and
all that, all these fields that are collectively would
collectively constitute physiology. There is a recent trend where
people are starting to think of health in terms
of specific dedicated processes rather than a kind of
normal functioning. You know, like, it's the normal, uh,
so generally, um, let's start with that idea. The
most intuitive idea you would find in philosophy of
medicine is to say that, uh, and probably the
one that comes to, to mind immediately is to
say that health is simply, uh, normal functioning. So
it's the normal level of functioning of some, of,
you know, level, normal level of function, let's say,
in, in general. In fact, some people start to
say, yeah, well. Well, of course there is that
meaning of, of health, but there is another one,
which is to say that just like you have
pathophysiological processes, you also have processes that are um.
Let's say trying to uh. Correct the effects of
those or antagonize the effects of pathophysiological processes, and
these you can call processes of health. So the
idea is to study those processes. So just give
you some very concrete examples, for instance, tissues would
repair. They have mechanisms for repair, for instance, um,
DNA has also many dedicated mechanisms to repair various
damage, not all possible damage, obviously and not perfectly,
but we have those mechanisms and some people would
call them mechanisms of health. You know, so this,
this is the idea that has emerged. So health
is not, so of course health, health is still,
uh, there still is a concept of health which
is what are the norms of normality and all
that, which is the very intuitive notion, but there
is this emerging. The notion that it's also health
can be also used as a generic term for
specific mechanisms that would antagonize diseases or explain for
instance longevity, that's meaning for instance exceptional longevity or
that kind of thing.
So let me ask you about homeostasis because that's
something that people in medicine tend to focus a
lot about when it comes to health. Does homeostasis
allow for us to understand the variability of health?
Also a good question. I think homeostasis has been
proposed first to precisely do the contrary, uh, explaining
the invariability of health, uh, so across individuals, like
it's the same thing you would find everywhere and
all that. The problem is that this concept itself
is so flexible. That it can also allow for
uh to explain how for instance your health and
my health would be also different. Like for instance,
we probably don't have exactly the same blood pressure
and we are, and one of us, for instance
is very healthy with their blood pressure while the
other uh would be, uh, would have, you know,
problems with uh that, that level of. Blood pressure,
for instance. So you have that kind of variability
across systems and um in a sense when you
have that concept, you don't explain much in the
variability that uh that is involved and that's, that's
kind of the problem with the concept of homeostasis.
So that's why I think it's a good question
to ask. Can you explain the variability? Yes, to
some extent you can, uh, but it's also very
limited because in a sense you can account for
every situation as long as it's stable. So that's
probably not, I mean, we probably need more.
Mhm. So, another aspect that people tend to associate
with homeostasis is the health of living organisms entirely
accounted for by homeostasis.
Probably, well, it depends on how homeostasis is defined.
So some people would say obviously no, and they
would say no because they think that there are
other phenomena that cannot be described as examples of
homeostasis. So that's typically the case for instance with
what some people have. Proposed to call allostasis, uh,
so allostasis is the idea that the balance of
an organism can move in time or can change
in time. So that's a general definition of allostasis
as opposed to homeostasis where it's supposed to be
stable in time, uh, so always the same. And
there are a lot of, uh, let's say um
debates in that field because many defenders of the
notion of homeostasis have said that in fact the
notion of homeostasis accounts for the variability of states
in time for the same individual, uh, like your
blood pressure is evolving in time, it would, it
would increase if you're running, for instance, for, for,
you know, your train or whatever and then it
would decrease when you're sleeping and then, you know,
so it's, it's, you know. So they would say
we don't need another concept for that, but some
defendants of allostasis have proposed a much more specific
notion of haostasis. For instance, some of them have
proposed this idea that sometimes the organisms are changing
their balance or the level, for instance, of homeostasis,
so to speak, not in reaction to a change
in the environment. But in reaction to a future
change in the environment, like uh in anticipation of
something, like for instance your blood pressure is increasing
before you need uh to have more blood pressure,
for instance, to, to, to run, for instance, you
know, that kind of of phenomena that involves some
kind of cognitive aspect are sometimes called allostasis and
you need that kind of concept if you want
to uh account for the health of an organism.
An organism that cannot do that would have problems
and uh on the other hand you can say
it's perfectly homeostatic. So these are the kind of
uh discussions that has been uh around uh, yeah,
those questions.
So I have just a couple of final questions
and uh I'm going to read uh a couple
of quotes from your book and ask you to
comment on them. So toward the end of the
book, you say that a quote. Health is indeed
a complex evolved trait, which makes it also an
object of investigation for evolutionary biology and philosophy of
biology. So could you explain in what ways it
is a complex evolved trait and how can it
be investigated by evolutionary biology?
Yes, so just to give you, let's, let's take
one very, uh, like, yeah, let's make an analogy.
For instance, you may be interested in the evolution
of the feather just to take a very traditional
example in evolutionary biology. So, uh, feather are used
for thermal regulation, also flying and all that, and
then you can try to. Draw, sketch, let's say
a history of the evolution of of having feathers.
So that's one thing you can do across species,
the species you have already, the species that have
disappeared in the past and all that. You can
do that. You can do the same kind of
investigations for traits like, for instance, air breathing. That
has been done, that you would say, OK, air
breathing is something that appeared in probably, uh, let's
say a long time ago, blah blah blah. You
can say in which circumstances, maybe when you have
oxygen in the atmosphere, which requires, you know, you
will have a, you can do that. It's also
speculative and you can do that. Well, you can
also. It's also possible to do that, for instance,
for, let's say because I'm talking about air breathing.
This involves, for instance, the kind of mechanisms of
health we were just mentioning that you need for
air breathing. So for instance, for instance, what would
you do with the particles that you would breathe,
breathe when you are breathing air? You would have
particles. You need to protect your tissues from those
particles. And in fact there is, there are a
lot of mechanisms that we know are helping for
that. So for instance, mucus production, for instance, on
your epithelium, there is a very sophisticated system of
that when you have two layers of mucus that
are not moving at the same speed, you have
ciliarries on the on the surface of the cell
that would, you know, create that flux in your,
in your lung that would protect your lung. Then
there are also other mechanisms. You have more of
them in the distal part of your lung than
in the. PART of your lung because they are
not exposed to the same kind of particles. So
there's a lot of things to say on this,
and these are simply mechanisms of resilience, um, yeah,
let's say resilience, um, or health if you prefer,
uh, of the lungs. So that's just one example
that is, I think, very interesting, and that's, uh,
so I hope it helps to see more concretely
what, what I mean by the evolution of complex
traits like resilience to air pollution, let's say, or
air particles.
And finally, I would like to read you a
quote where you highlight some of the differences between
philosophy of medicine and philosophy of physiology, and I
would like to, to ask you then to comment
on it. So in philosophy of medicine, the ultimate
goal of the conceptual work on diseases, disease, or
health has always been social and ethical. In the
end, it is about judgments and actions. In philosophy
of physiology, the goal of all conceptual work is
to push further our understanding of the natural phenomena
of health and diseases. So what is the main
difference that you are highlighting there?
As we said in the beginning, I think that
in most, most, for the most part, philosophers of
medicine have historically investigated medicine as a practice. And
so this is what I'm saying here in that
sentence, uh, some major determinants of that practice are,
for instance, values, the way we judge whether someone
has a disease or whether what they have, it
should not be considered, uh, as a disease and
all that. On the other hand, if you, if,
I mean, if medicine was only based on that,
we would lose something which is the, the exactly
all the things we have discussed uh in, in
our, in our interview, um, all these things would
be missed. We need also this theoretical part, the
part where you're starting to try to generalize, uh,
you know, understand what is common to many diseases,
maybe all of them, you know, all these things
like. Is inflammation, for instance, is inflammation something major
if you want to understand diseases? Is it involved
in all diseases, by the way? Maybe it is.
So maybe it's so important to understand diseases that
diseases, in fact, the very definition of disease should
include, for instance, the possibility of inflammation, for instance.
You see, so those are the kinds of questions
that are of major interest to researchers in those
in that field. So it's really important for the
science. And I think it's also very important for
philosophers who are interested in the theoretical aspects of
those uh sciences. So that's the main difference, the
main contrast I would say. So it's perfectly possible
that they, you know, coexist peacefully. It's just different
approaches. So, and the main trait is to say
that one is based on the practice of medicine
while the other one is based on the science
of, uh, medicine, let's say medical sciences or biomedical
sciences.
Mhm. Great. So the book is again Philosophy of
Physiology. I will be leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview. And Doctor Lewan,
uh, just before we go, apart from the book,
would you like to tell people where they can
find your work on the internet?
Yes, I mean, you can go on the website
of our team, so it's called Immunoconcept. I think
if you look into that, you, you will find
our team and my personal page is there with
my recent publications and research programs.
Great. So, uh, look, I, I really love the
interview. I would recommend your book to everyone interested
in questions surrounding medicine and particularly what is disease
and what is health. It's a very interesting read.
So thank you so much for coming on the
show to talk about it.
Thank you again for your invitation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan, Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.